so far we have looked at nash equilibria
only in games with finitely many actions
in this video we want to see what
changes if players have a continuum of
actions available
the standard example that we had last
week for a continuum of action was a
cournot duopoly where the opec countries
and the russian federation compete in a
global market for oil
and
this is the parameterization that we had
last week both players can produce any
quantity at a unit cost of 10
units per barrel
and then we had a linear price function
that starts at 100 and then linearly
decreases with total supply
now in this game we have already derived
the best response correspondence for
players
pure action so if
we are certain that our opponent plays
or produces a certain quantity
then we best respond with this quantity
here
and these
there are conjectures how we call them
the certainty that they play a
pure strategy can help us find pure
strategy in ash equilibrium
so if we were to write this as a best
response correspondence like we did for
the finite games it would look in this
way
and we can verify now consistency in the
same way as before by simply going
through all of these cases
we can start again with any case that we
would like so let's say we start here
if
firm 2 produces more than 90
then
firm 1 will best respond with 0
then we see what happens if we plug in 0
then
from 2 should play 45 which is
inconsistent with what we started with
so this is not a nash equilibrium
in exactly the same way it's not
possible that firm 1 produces more than
and
then if both players or both firms
produce less than 90 then we have a cis
system of two by two equations
which has a unique solution where both
players produce 30.
we've already seen this outcome as the
uniquely rationalizable outcome and it's
no surprise that this is also a nash
equilibrium
what i wanted to highlight here though
is that
nothing changes
in this approach where we first find the
player's best response correspondences
and then we verify consistency this
works no matter if players have finitely
many actions or they have a continuum of
actions and it works even if let's say
one player has finitely many the other
eight continuum of actions
and it also works in dynamic settings or
games with incomplete information that
we will look at through the rest of the
class so really all the equilibria that
we will look at in the entire class can
be found using this procedure
so here is an example of a game where
one firm firm one has a continuum of
actions available has to choose a pure
quantity but can be anything between
zero and infinity and firm 2 can only
choose
1 of 0 20 or 40
barrels of oil to produce but firm 2
here has the ability to mix
and you can try
for yourself if you can solve this
example i should be clear here this is
not part of the participation grade this
is just for you to get additional
practice to solve through some of these
examples
now in this case the corner game we have
seen that
a nash equilibrium existed in pure
strategy so that's sort of the best we
can hope for
and
that's not always the case now the
reason why it worked is very similar
to why we were able to work only with
pure strategy conjectures is because we
have this nice
concavity
or if we think about it a little bit
more carefully what we actually need is
quasi concavity
now before we even look at the
mathematical definition let's look at
the graph of a typical
quasi-concave function
and it's a function that increases first
and then decreases
and what this means is that
there is a unique
maximum in a sense or put differently
any local maximum so anything that we
could find
with the first order necessary condition
is actually a global maximum
now the formal definition here states
that
between any two points
the function value is higher than the
smallest value
of either at x or y
and so if x or y takes the same value
then it means that any point in between
has to be larger or equal than
this value and if they take different
values then it means well it's simply
larger than
the smaller of those
because it decreases down here to y
so quasi-concavity here generalizes
concavity
and quasi-concavity is sufficient for
local maxima to be global maximum
we then have this existence theorem here
by debrew glicksberg and fan
who have shown individually actually
that
in a game where
players have continuous actions
but
the action sets are compact and convex
such that players utility functions are
continuous not only in their own actions
but also in everybody else's actions
and
the utility function is quasi concave in
players own utility
then the game has a nash equilibrium in
pure strategies
and so
that is sort of the best possible case
we can hope for
and
those are games that are extremely well
behaved like the cournot wapoli where we
have
as we have seen a unique nash
equilibrium in pure strategies now
because this is so convenient to work
with pure strategies we often try to
parameterize applications so that these
conditions here are satisfied and if we
can find a parameterization of the model
that we're studying that satisfies these
conditions then analyzing equilibria
will be much simpler than if it does not
satisfy these conditions
now
quasi-concavity
the role of quasi-concavity in this
result here is like i mentioned
that
the first order necessary condition is
sufficient to find a global maximum
let's
now discuss the other two assumptions so
first we'll discuss
why the strategy space has to be compact
and convex and what can go wrong if it
is not
so for compactness
there is
a game the game of chicken that is
frequently
analyzed by
game theorists or analyzed i should say
used in classes as an example
it was in a movie rebel without a cause
with james dean
where
two to james dean and another
another actor in the film
they have this race
where they race towards a cliff in their
cars
and then they jump out of the cars and
let the cars go over the cliff
and the goal of the game is to jump out
as late as possible because if you jump
out first then you'll be a chicken
if we parametrize this
as a game then we could say what are the
players strategies well it's the time
they choose
to jump out of the car
there will be some fixed time t at which
they reach the cliff and they have to
jump out at any time before they reach
the cliff once they reach the cliff it's
too late and they will go down the cliff
with the car
in this case we see that
the strategy space is not
compact because it is
not closed and what can go wrong is that
it's always a better response to wait
just a little longer so no matter how
late
the other guy jumps out of the car as
long as it's before t
then i always have a
best response to just jump out right
after him we see that the players can
jump out later and later
and it suggests that the equilibrium
should be the limit point
but the problem is the limit point is
not included because at that time they
both go over the cliff
so we see that in that case
we cannot have a nash equilibrium
in the same sense
if
the strategy space is not bounded then
there might not be an equilibrium so if
there is no cliff ever then the guys
would just drive on and on and on
and again there will be no equilibrium
because they just
can always drive a little longer
now
to
understand what can go wrong with
if continuity isn't satisfied let's look
at
an example of a beach vendor
or a model actually of two beach vendors
who set up shop on a beach of unit
length and they can shed set up shop
anywhere on the beach
then the beach goers are distributed
uniformly
and
they set up their space anywhere on the
beach and then when they want something
to drink they will always go to the
beach vendor who is closer to them
what does this mean for the utility
functions that the players have well if
they set up shop
here and here then this means that
the first vendor will get to sell to
everybody
on this side of the beach
and then to half of the customers
between the two
and then the second vendor will get to
sell to everybody on this side of the
beach and do half of them between those
two
and so if we measure the utility of the
beach vendors as sort of the measure of
or a fraction of people they sell to
then x1 here will sell
or
vendor 1 will sell
all those serve all those customers so
vendor 1's utility is simply x1 plus x2
half whereas the second vendor will sell
the remaining ones so 1 minus x1 plus x2
and then we have to specify what happens
if they both set up shop at the same
spot in which case
they'll just get half off
of the beach customers
because it's equally far to get to both
vendors
and this is a discontinuous utility
function if we draw it for some value of
x2 here then
okay at the very end at zero if player
one chooses a zero then
they split all those customers between
them equally which means that
they get half of the distance here
then the utility increases the closer
vendor 1 sets up shop to x2 until
it's very close they set up shop very
close to x2 they get all the customers
essentially on this side of the beach
the problem is that if they set up
exactly at the same spot as x2 they only
get half the customers
on the other hand if they set up shop on
the other side
of vendor two they'll have a lower
payoff and again it's decreasing the
further away they go because they serve
a smaller fraction of the customers
now this discontinuity here will cause
some problems for best responses because
the closer we get the better our
response is
but the limit point again is
what's included but it gives a lower
utility than anywhere
as we approach this point x2
yeah so has a discontinuity if
x2 is different from one half because
if x2 is one-half then
it will connect nicely to this point
here
so if x2 is different from one-half
there's a discontinuity and it jumps
down to one-half
now this means that
no position is actually the best
response
because it's always a better response
no matter how close we set up shop it's
always a better response to set up just
even closer to x2
and this means that there's actually no
best response and the best response
correspondence is empty
for all
x2 they're different from one half
what happens for one half well in that
case
at
x2 we get half of the customers and we
still get half of the customers if we
deviate
just by a infinitesimal amount to either
side
and this means that we have a pure
strategy nash equilibrium where both
vendors set up shop at exactly one half
because we see the best response to one
half is one half
and this is true for both players and so
clearly those are consistent
now we could extend this to two
dimensions um it would be mathematically
more complicated
but
we are then able to to use it to predict
how
businesses set up shop anywhere in a
city
and if you walk around taipei you may
have noticed that 711 and family mart
always set up shop right across the
street from each other or right next to
each other
and the reason is
exactly the same because if they did not
then there would be a better response to
set up shop closer to the competition
because
we're unwilling to to move to walk too
far for a convenience store
for the same reasons let's say gas
stations always set up at the same
intersection
and the reason is
the same as in this example of the beach
vendors
now this is known as hoteling's spatial
competition and has nothing to do with
hotels
is simply due to harald hoteling who
first analyzed this
this special competition
hoteling's model
also has applications to voting um
last year 2020 there were quite a few
presidential elections around the globe
um we had elections here in taiwan we're
signing 101 with 57 percent of the vote
joe biden won 51 percent
in poland anja duda one with 51 percent
and in croatia zoran villanovich one
with 52
of the popular vote and we see that all
of those are relatively close to 50
and can we explain this with a model
similar to hoteling's competition
can we explain it with
a model of voting where people vote for
the candidate who closely mac who most
closely matches their
political ideals
let's say we represent the spectrum the
political spectrum with a unit interval
again so zero here is the very left edge
of the political spectrum one would be
the very right edge of the political
spectrum
and then people simply vote for their
the politician that represents their
preferences the most closely
now in such a model
the two candidates of the two parties
would have an incentive exactly like in
the beach vendor setup
to
choose
um
political
positions that are exactly identical of
each other
so that they both get half of the voter
share
while this does
represent sort of the outcome
it doesn't really explain it too well
from
an intuitive
approach um we don't really see that
trump and biden have the same ideology
so
what what goes wrong here
also one thing that we have to consider
is that
for those two-party systems
the people first need to be nominated by
their party to compete in the
presidential election so let's say if
half of the spectrum is republican and
half is democrat
then who most likely wins the democratic
nomination is whoever is in the center
of the democratic
opinion
and then for the republicans it will be
whoever is in the center of the
republican opinion
then we get something
where the two candidates are pretty much
at let's say a quarter of the spectrum
and at three quarters of the spectrum
then once they compete with each other
they pretty much get half of the vote
now we see that if there's one party
without primaries if there's one party
where the candidate does not have to
compete with others for the nomination
then that party is an advantage because
that candidate can put themselves a bit
closer to the center than they could if
they had to compete with other people
from their own party this means that
incumbents have an advantage to get
reelected
and maybe this is why we saw that
zainwen won with 57
whereas non-incumbents only one with 51
or 52 percent of the vote
yeah so this model is imperfect
in the sense that
a political stance
the political stance of a politician is
rather well known especially politicians
that are sufficiently well known to be
candidating for presidency
so the politicians don't really choose
necessarily
their position on the line
i mean they do but they can't change it
before an election at least not by much
but what it illustrates here is that
the political candidate will win
who is
who who most closely represents the
preferences of the median voter
and this is known as the median voter
theorem
the proof is a little bit different it's
not exactly hoteling's model but
hoteling's model is often used to
explain the median voter theorem
let's now suppose that we have three
vendors on the beach what would change
well let's first try to see what the
utility function should be like let's
say
vendor 1 sits up here vendor 2 sets up
here and then well on the outside the
utility function will look exactly as it
did before
so
if
player 3 sets up
at the very edge of the beach then they
only get half
of the customers between them and vendor
one and then the closer they set up shop
to vendor one the more
customers they can serve
and the same on the other side
what happens if they set up between
the two vendors
then if they set up here let's say
then
well they get the customers that are
from right to middle between them and
vendor 1 to the customers right between
the middle of them and vendor 2.
and
the difference here
or the distance
if we subtract
this one from the other one then we see
that x3 cancels out and they always just
get exactly half of this interval right
because they lose
one part here that they serve and then
they lose one part here this equally
largest one that they serve so in the
end these are exactly half
of the customers between x1 and 2. so
they will get a constant utility for
setting up shop between x1 and x2
and then what happens if they set up
exactly at x1 or x2 well in that case
they share the customers
with
vendor one
but only those that are on this side of
the beach
or if they set up here they share
customers with vendor two but only those
on this side of the beach and so
the payoff that i get is exactly again
half between those two points
again we see that
the utilities are discontinuous mostly
there's one case which it would not be
discontinuous how is that well
so essentially when those points
match
the
limit points from left and right match
the utility for exactly choosing the
same location as another render so if we
move x1 here to the left then
the limit point from the top will
decrease and from the bottom will
increase
and
what's the left limit point here is
exactly how far x1 is positioned on the
beach
so the right limit point here is that as
well and then in between is exactly half
the distance between x1 and x2
so this means that we will get
a continuous utility function if x1 sets
up shop at one quarter and if x2 sets up
shop at three quarters
and that's the only
time when
the utility function of player 3 the
response function is continuous and
that's the only time when we can have
a best response because otherwise we
always have this downward discontinuity
which means that there is no best
response
so
in conclusion
the best response correspondence is
empty unless
the two vendors set up shop at one
quarter and three quarter in which case
the third vendor is willing to set up
shop anywhere in between
what does this mean for
pure strategy and ash equilibria well
it means there is none because if vendor
three sets up shop here
then
vendor one
will have an incentive to deviate and
set up shop closer to
player three
if vendor 3 sets up shop here player 2
will have an incentive to deviate and if
player 3 sets up shop anywhere in
between then the others two don't
actually have the best response
so we see here that no pure strategy in
ash equilibrium can exist
and so for the last video then we want
to look at
how can we find mixed strategy nash
equilibria or do mixed strategy nash
equilibrium even exist
now
a crucial role whether they exist is
played by those discontinuities and
before i even show you the formal
definition
what we're going to define here are
upper semi-continuity and lower
semi-continuity so upper semi-continuous
function is one where the limit point is
always above
where the limit point is always below
the function value
so this is good for maximization
lower semi-continuous function is one
where the limit point
is
above the function value so there's a
downward discontinuity and this is bad
for maximization
so the formal definition is yeah as we
approach
a discontinuity x
the limit
is
below
the function value regardless from which
side that we approach
and lower simultaneous if it's the
opposite if
the limit is
always
larger than the function value and then
in the footnote you have the definition
of what the limb sub precisely mean
but
the important take away from here is
really what the graph of a upper and
lower semi-continuous function looks
like
and then we have
this existence result for
reasonably upper semi-continuous payoffs
we have again
the assumption on the domain which has
to be compact convex and a subset of
euclidean space
then we have
the condition that the sum of the
players utilities is upper
semi-continuous and then there's a third
condition that is actually rather
complicated to state so i will simply
say discontinuities are sufficiently
nice and rare
so i want to mostly talk about the
second assumption here that the sum of
utilities is upper semicontinuous
and so this means that
the sum here
is essentially the social surplus that
the players can divide amongst
themselves and the social surplus that
must be
upper semi-continuous if the total
surplus in the system has a downward
discontinuity at any point then we
cannot really expect that an equilibrium
exists
and this condition is satisfied by the
hoteling model and the burn through our
model
where players choose prices
and
in that case it's actually continuous
right so the total customers on the
beach are always the same so the total
surplus is constant
but
yeah sufficient for existence is
actually upper semicontinuity
and
yeah that's the existence result and in
the next video then we will look at how
can we find those mixed strategy nash
equilibrium for now though a few
questions for you to solve about
how to find nash equilibria with a
continuum of actions
and the literature
um
yeah it's dealt with in foodenberg tyrol
then we have the original paper by
hoteling for the spatial competition
then we have the three
papers that show existence of a pure
strategy nash equilibrium in
if
we have this quasi-concave utilities and
then the paper by das gupta and asking
that joe's existence
for these discontinuous games